it's speeding time at sea world's rescue
center team members tossed sardines to a
group of sea lion pups all of these pups
were rescued along the San Diego Coast
when they came here they were starving
some are bouncing back others continue
the language just like us when you don't
feel good you don't always feel like
eating these animals are so severely
malnourished they don't feel like eating
either within the first two to three
days when they start getting rehydrated
they start getting some of that
nourishment that we're providing they
start showing us signs of a little bit
more activity the rescue centers Jody
Westberg love seeing that means the pups
are regaining their halt
and that's her primary concern she wants
to get them back into the wild with
Westberg also wants to help find out
what's going on when we bring them in
the most important thing is to get them
a physical exam by our veterinary team
then to rehydrate them and start
providing them nourishment length weight
and sex are all recorded blood fecal and
urine samples are taken and when needed
necropsies are performed the information
is being shared with federal officials
the National Marine Fisheries Service
has declared the situation an unusual
mortality event they've put together a
panel of researchers that's looking into
things there's currently an
investigation underway to look into the
exact cause of the problem right now we
don't know what if that cause is but the
leading hypothesis is that it's related
to a food issue hundreds of starving
under sized sea lions have been rescued
from beaches cliffs and even restaurants
along the Southern California coast
SeaWorld promises an unlimited capacity
to help in San Diego County but other
rescue centers are feeling the strain
some are turning away all but the most
critically ill pups Southwest fisheries
Science Center researcher mark Lowry has
studied sea lions since the 1980s he
collects and examines sea lion droppings
to find out what the animals are eating
now he says it's typical for one type of
food to dominate the sea lion diet when
things are going well market squid are a
staple as evidenced by the squid beaks
that he's
covered just imagine a parent beak so
you have like an upper beak and you have
a lower beak that they sort of like fit
into each other
Wow our he suspects he'll find a more
diverse diet in the samples he's
collecting this spring that's what
happened during a sea lion pup die-off
in 2009 a year when El Nino moved the
mammals food supply away from breeding
areas but this year there is no El Nino
another possibility is that the current
population of about 300,000 sea lions is
just too large the ability of the
environment to sustain a population that
only changes up and down nothing and so
it's probably dropped down a little bit
and it's affecting the population he's
that's what I think is happening sea
lion pups along the Southern California
coast shouldn't be having these kinds of
problems in fact they should be back at
their ruies on islands just off the
coast with their mothers nursing it
shouldn't be weaning until April or May
and they're born out on the Channel
Islands which is you know 40 to 60 miles
off the coast and they've left early
Jeff Flake tracks the sea lion
population for the National Marine
Fisheries Service and he says the
situation has likely already claimed the
lives of some thirty thousand sea lion
pups that's nearly half of all the pups
born last summer the normal mortality
rate is 15 to 20 percent there was an
event in 2009 that occurred in spring
when most of the pups are being born and
when that happened was eighty percent
mortality that cohort
but what didn't public didn't see it
because they were so small that he
actually died out on the islands
this event has Crested he says it could
stretch into June when the next puppet
season begins
federal officials looking into the
situation are still gathering data they
say it may be several months before they
can explain the cause of a sea lions
crisis food availability is the leading
suspect but disease hasn't been ruled
out Erik Anderson KPBS news